Maths
=====

The Parallel Full Approximation Scheme in Spact and Time (PFASST)
algorithm is time-parallel (across the domain) algorithm for marching
time-dependent ODEs or PDEs through time.

The PFASST algorithm is perhaps most easily understood as a parallel
version of the multi-level Spectral Deferred Correction (MLSDC) scheme
(see below).  Some aspects of PFASST are also reminiscent of the
Parareal algorithm (see below).


MLSDC
-----

During a PFASST iteration, each processor


Parareal
--------

The Parareal method can be roughly described in terms of two numerical
approximation methods, denoted here by :math:`\mathcal{G}` and
:math:`\mathcal{F}`.  Both :math:`\mathcal{G}` and :math:`\mathcal{F}`
propagate an initial value :math:`U_n \approx u(t_n)` by approximating
the solution to

.. math::

  \dot{u} = f(u,t), \quad u(t_n) = u_n

from :math:`t_n` to :math:`t_{n+1}`.  For the methods to be efficient,
it must be the case that the :math:`\mathcal{G}` propagator is
computationally less expensive than the :math:`\mathcal{F}`
propagator, and hence :math:`\mathcal{G}` is typically a low-order
method.  Since the overall accuracy of the methods is limited by the
accuracy of the :math:`\mathcal{F}` propagator, :math:`\mathcal{F}` is
typically higher-order and in addition may use a smaller time step
than :math:`\mathcal{G}`.  For these reasons, :math:`\mathcal{G}` is
referred to as the coarse propagator and :math:`\mathcal{F}` the fine
propagator.

The parareal method begins by computing a first approximation
:math:`U_{n+1}^0` for :math:`n = 0 \ldots N-1` where :math:`N` is the
number of time steps, often performed with the coarse propagator:

.. math::

   U_{n+1}^0 = \mathcal{G}(t_{n+1}, t_{n}, U_n^0).

The Parareal method then proceeds iteratively, alternating between the
parallel computation of :math:`\mathcal{F}(t_{n+1},t_n,U_n^k)` and an
update of the initial conditions at each processor of the form

.. math::

  U_{n+1}^{k+1} = \mathcal{G}(t_{n+1}, t_n, U_n^{k+1})
                   + \mathcal{F}(t_{n+1}, t_n, U_n^k)
                   - \mathcal{G}(t_{n+1}, t_n, U_n^{k})

for :math:`n = 0 \ldots N-1`.  That is, the fine propagator is used
to refine the solution in each time slice in parallel, while the
coarse propagator is used to propagate the refinements performed by
the fine propagator through time to later processors.

The PFASST method operaters in a similar manner to the Parareal
method, but it employs the MLSDC time-integration technique in a novel
way to improve the parallel efficiency of the method.


References
----------

